---
layout: post
title:  "Book Review of 'Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind'"
date: 2015-04-28 20:32:00
categories: books
---

"History" can mean a lot of things. The traditional history book
reminds me of history class in high school. There's some period of
American or European history and you are encouraged to memorize a list
of naval battles. [Sapiens: A Brief History of
Humankind](http://www.amazon.com/Sapiens-A-Brief-History-Humankind/dp/0062316095)
by Yuval Harari is not a traditional history book.

The thing about history is that there is so much of it. Even in a
single year. Think of all the things that happened in 2014. This
amount of stuff probably also happened in 1492. We just have decided
that we only care about a portion of it. So a normal history ends up
being a history of politics. A history of kings, nations, wars, and
conquest.

Instead, this book steps back and takes a broader view. What
are the three most important events in human history? Harari picks
three revolutions: the Cognitive, Agricultural, and Scientific
revolutions.

The Cognitive Revolution is when human beings went from being just
like other animals to being unique. The key was the ability to spread
culture - communication that helped humans coordinate better
and learn faster than DNA-based evolution allowed. We usually take it
for granted that humans dominate animals but it wasn't always the
case, and it's interesting to think of verbal communication as a
technology of war that let us defeat animals that previously were our
predators.

One theme of this book is confronting painful truths. For example, we
know from the fossil record that there used to be different species
similar to humans, like Neanderthals. What happened to them?
Was *Homo Sapiens* the eventual victor because of our ability to
genocidally destroy the other human species? We will never know for
sure but it seems like yes.

The Agricultural Revolution was when we started farming. This book
makes the case also made in [Guns, Germs, and
Steel](http://www.amazon.com/Guns-Germs-Steel-Fates-Societies/dp/0393317552)
that the invention of farming was actually pretty terrible for the
average human. Our lives were worse as farmers. It's just that farming
could feed far more people than hunting and gathering, so the farming
way of life won out.

I don't agree with this argument, because I don't think individual
human happiness is the right metric to aim for. Personally I think the
world became a
better place with ten million humans than with one million, primarily
because it's pretty cool that those extra nine million get to
live. But I can understand how people would disagree here.

*Sapiens* is similar to *Guns, Germs, and Steel* in many ways. If you
 liked one, there's a good chance you'd like the other. They both look
 at a broad stretch of human history, disregard the "standard
 historical important stuff", and ask what was the real important
 factors that led to this outcome. Overall, this book is much more
 willing to come to controversial conclusions. I found it a
 bit suspicious that *Guns, Germs, and Steel* came to only conclusions
 that social science academics would agree with politically.

The best example comes in the discussion of the Scientific
Revolution, which Harari describes as about 1500 to the present. The
main events in world history during this period are basically
Europeans violently taking over the world, and there's the obvious
question of why Europeans?

Framing all of human history as these three revolutions, there are
obvious parallels between the three. It seems pretty likely that *Homo
Sapiens* became the only *Homo* species by killing off the other
ones. There is even more evidence in the agricultural era that farming
societies were much stronger militarily and frequently wiped out
non-agricultural societies. And then a similar thing happened again in
the Scientific era, where European cultures got military dominance
over the rest of the world, and while they did not actually slaughter
everyone they at least spread their culture everywhere. Nowadays every
patch of ground is part of a nation-state and all of the leaders wear
suits and spend money. So each of these revolutions was not just a
revolution in everyday life,
but also a revolution in military technology that let the new order
violently displace the old.

So why Europeans? Harari basically concludes, there's no fundamental
reason. It's just the culture that happened to get scientific
first. More than science, it's the idea of "progress" - that society
can be improved, by discovering new technology, new lands, new all
sorts of things.

Another controversial theme of this book is drawing parallels between
different human ideas. For example, Harari classifies many things as
"fictions that help societies despite being biologically false". All
religions, ideologies like communism and capitalism, principles like
human rights, concepts like nations, everyday conventions like the use
of money and the concept of ownership. How much difference is there
between believing in a sun god and believing in free markets? How much
difference is there between believing your country was destined to
rule the world and believing your species was destined to rule the
world? Why do we believe what we believe?

Overall I found pondering these questions to be a lot of fun and I
would recommend this book to anyone who likes thinking about what it
means to be human.