---
layout: post
title: "Resolutions for 2023"
date: 2023-01-03 14:00:00
categories: life
---

My resolutions from last year [went pretty
well](/life/2023/01/02/2022-review.html) so let's do that again.

## 1. Health

I plan to keep working out four times a week, but this is enough of a
habit that I feel like I don't need to "resolve" to do it. Diet-wise,
my target weight is below 189. Counting calories is the most
straightforward way I've found to achieve this, but I want to be clear
about the metric that I most care about here.

## 2. Astronomy

Last year I hoped to get on a publication for Green Bank work. That's
been delayed but I still hope to get it done this year. Plus, I'd also
like to get a publication from my MeerKAT work. So, two parts to this
goal.

A publication isn't really the ultimate goal here. The ultimate goal
is to find aliens. But barring that, I'd like to have the MeerKAT
pipeline up and operational, getting daily or weekly notifications for
the best candidates, basically the way a sane astronomy data pipeline
should be operating. I think there will probably be some paper as a
side effect because a lot of other people desire papers. So
publication seems like a decent proxy goal.

## 3. AI

I think I should get more "into the AI space". I have some ideas, but
I want to stay open to flex around different ideas. In 2023 my goal is
to release a "respectable AI project".

What makes it respectable? I'll know it when I see it. Something that
I would respect if someone else did it.

I'm thinking about the math-theorem-proving space; I'll start off
trying some stuff there.

## 4. Spanish

My goal is to learn enough Spanish to read Ficciones in Spanish. I
bought the book on Kindle many years ago and realized my Spanish
wasn't good enough. I've been doing Duolingo for about a year, but
it's really just been a refresh of my high school Spanish, and I need
to push harder to get it better.

Why learn Spanish? I feel like there's an intellectual value in
learning a second language that's hard to describe. Your primary
language is the filter through which you see so much of the
world. Isn't it strange that you can load up a second one?

I love learning new programming languages and I feel like I get a lot
from that. I also love reading books. So maybe I will get something
from a second language.

I don't think I should just start off plowing through the book, I
should start with a harder push on Duolingo, at least get my verb
tense knowledge solidified, maybe aim for better vocabulary too.

## 5. Secret resolution

I also have a secret resolution! But it's secret.

## Now what?

I'll see how much I feel like giving updates. Last year I did a mid
year one and that seemed just fine. The main value of the update was
that I lost some energy to write blog posts and gained some energy to
switch around the sort of astronomy project I was working on.
