---
layout: post
title: "2022 Review"
date: 2023-01-02 12:00:00
categories: life
---

Last year I made some [New Year's
resolutions](/life/2021/12/31/resolutions.html). Let's take a look at how they did.


## 1. Calorie Counting

I got weak at actually counting calories toward the end and skipped
like half of December. But I did a lot better than I expected at
losing weight. Somehow I am reluctant to
make an explicit weight goal on here, but the bottom line is to get
healthier and for getting healthier for an overweight guy, there is a
very logical metric of losing weight. So let's just get past
that. I've been tracking my weight with the iOS health app for a while
and per year my average has been:

* 2016: 231.0
* 2017: 227.4
* 2018: 210.3
* 2019: 213.4
* 2020: 218.3
* 2021: 218.0
* 2022: 191.8

A bit of an improvement after I left Facebook. But really this past
year has been a huge improvement. The main danger is backsliding,
which is a big danger since calorie-counting is so annoying. From
here, I just need to "maintain".

## 2. Astronomy Publication

Overall I missed this goal. I think the Green Bank work will end up in
a paper, just not
during 2022. I think [seticore](https://github.com/lacker/seticore)
will end up as the core signal processing component for the
[MeerKAT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MeerKAT) pipeline, but
probably just a small part of the 
[VLA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Very_Large_Array) pipeline, and
nothing is really functional here at end-of-year 2022, PR
announcements notwithstanding.

I'm glad I set this goal. I'm a little frustrated that I don't really
see an obvious path for improvement in retrospect. Maybe this is a
sign that I should shift some of my mental energy elsewhere. I like
this astronomy work, but it is often the sort of project that
naturally has a certain amount of stuff to do, and after some point
there are diminishing returns. I guess this is a result of working on
things with a lot of other people.

## 3. Exercise

This is just a normal part of my routine now. I'm happy with it. I
stalled in terms of how much weight I can lift, but I've been adding
more rowing machine to my routine, which seems pretty good. All in
all, success.

## 4. Blogging

Well, after being slightly behind at the end of H1, my blogging just
totally collapsed. I lost the will to fight for this one. I like
blogging, or at least I like the sort of reflecting on things that I
do while blogging, but blogging ends up being something I can do with
my most productive mental energy. I'm sitting down, ready to work, and
I could fire into anything, and blogging is one of those things. But
it's never really the most important thing I want to do on a
particular day. Or if it is, it's because of some artificial thing. I
don't know.

So, I missed this goal too, but really because I stopped wanting to do
it, more than because I stopped feeling able to do it. Different from
the astronomy publication one.

## 5. Secret resolution?

One thing I randomly started doing is Duolingo, at which I have
approximately a year streak. I started it sort of in the spirit of
resolutions but I didn't make a real resolution for it. I feel good
about that although I'm a little worried it's too superficial, like it
just teased some of my ancient Spanish learning back into my
forebrain, rather than necessarily giving me enough to do anything.

## Looking Forward

Resolutions are great. I'll do another set for this year.

The personal health stuff worked really well. The intellectual
accomplishment stuff, not so well. But that's partially because my
personal health goals are like, "decent health", and my intellectual
accomplishment goals are like, "I need to push myself to excel".

It's also because I have a more functional set of habits around things
like reading books and coding. I just enjoy that and do it fairly
regularly. I don't really need or want resolutions to mess with it.

Maybe I should have some separate set of things which is "the
routine", which is good, and I need to keep doing it, but I don't need
to make resolutions for it. I mean, I guess I have that? Should I
write it down? I don't know. I'll think about it a bit.
